# Lab 8: INDUCTION

### Equipment

-   DMM, oscilloscope, function generator and step-down transformers.

-   Solenoid, magnets, battery eliminator and connectors (BNC, banana
    and alligator)

-   Inductive brake, inductive wand with gap magnet. St. Louis motors.

-   Demo apparatus: jumping ring and conductive pipe with rare-earth
    magnet

## Conceptual (C-Level) DONE BEFORE LAB

Describe what Faraday’s Law is using your own words.

Run the simulation “Faraday’s Electromagnetic Lab” , and examine the
following parts: (<http://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulation/faraday>)

-   Under the “Pickup Coil” tab, move the magnet into and out of the
    coil. Start with the magnet on the left, with the N pole closest to
    the coil. Explain the direction of the current as the magnet moves
    towards the loop, and away from the coil.

-   Repeat for the S pole being closest to the coil.

-   Use the voltmeter instead of the light bulb, and describe what
    happens to the voltage driving the current when the magnet is moved
    faster.

## Basic Lab (B-Level)

You will be measuring time-varying voltage signals.

-   Connect a solenoid to a voltage probe. Move a cow magnet into and
    out of the coils of the solenoid as smoothly as possible, while a
    group member times the period of motion (alternately, use a motion
    sensor). Determine the amplitude of the induced signal in the
    solenoid as a function of frequency of magnetic motion. Relate your
    findings to Faraday’s Law of induction.

-   There are three different aluminum wands that may be mounted on a
    rotary motion sensor. Mount each one and let it swing between the
    poles of the mounted magnet pair. Measure the time it takes for each
    of the wands to come to a stand still. Hypothesize why the wands
    slow down differently, based on your understanding of Faraday’s Law
    of Induction.

## Advanced/Extended Lab Ideas (A-Level)

-   Determine the terminal velocity of magnet in free-fall through
    conductive pipe. Compare theory to experiment.

-   Use an oscilloscope to determine the amplitude and frequency for the
    output from the step-down transformer. Compare with DMM voltage
    reading.

-   Connect one of the small hand-cranked “genencon” generators to the
    input of an oscilloscope. Map out the DC level of the output versus
    frequency of cranking, and relate to Faraday’s Law of Induction.
    Although the generator is a DC generator, notice there is a small AC
    component that may be investigated as well.

-   Determine the voltage signal from a Hall Effect probe positioned
    near a working St Louis motor. Make sure to include a diagram of
    your setup and expected DC and AC signals. Note: Use the Faraday’s
    Law simulation to determine what to expect when you create a
    generator.

-   Can you measure a signal in a solenoid surrounding a conductive pipe
    when a magnet is dropped through the pipe?

-   Determine the motor frequency as a function of current through the
    electromagnet in a St Louis motor.

-   Examine the signal produced when one of the coil wands swings
    between the poles of the mounted magnet pair. The coil wands may be
    mounted on a rotary motion sensor.

SEE DELETED IMAGES IN WORD DOC

#

#

#

# Lab 9: SNELL’S LAW (REFRACTION)

### Additional Equipment

-   Light boxes with power supply and various optics

## Conceptual (C-Level) DONE BEFORE LAB

Light travels in a straight line except when it encounters an interface
(don’t worry about curved space right now). View the following demos:

<http://www.demonstrations.wolfram.com/SnellsLawOfRefractionWaveFronts/>

<http://www.demonstrations.wolfram.com/FermatsPrincipleAndSnellsLaw/>

<http://www.demonstrations.wolfram.com/ReflectionAndRefractionOnAFlatSurfaceBetweenTwoDifferentMate/>

Draw a picture showing the refraction of light for the following
situations. Clearly indicate where the actual object is located and
where the image is located. Indicate apparent depth and actual depth as
well as what assumptions you make.

-   You are looking at a fish under water (n~water~ \> n~air~).

<!-- -->

-   You are looking up at a bird while swimming under water.

<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">*Explorations (IN LAB)*</span>:

-   Using a rectangular object examine a single ray of light as it
    enters and leaves the object. When is the offset greatest?

-   Try other objects (an equilateral triangle is interesting). What do
    you notice?

## Basic Lab (B-Level)

Using Snell’s Law, determine the index of refraction for one of the
plastic objects.

-   Any object is fine to use. You just need to find a procedure to
    > measure the angle of incidence and the angle of refraction.

-   Make an appropriate plot of your angular data and use a linear fit
    > to find the index of refraction.

> <span style="font-variant:small-caps;">Note</span>: The half-moon
> object simplifies the procedure

Beware of stray light rays! The height of the light ray from the light
box (the slit height) is greater than the height of the plastic objects.
You will always see an un-refracted ray illuminate the top of these
objects. If it bothers you use tape to reduce the slit height.

## Advanced/Extended Lab Ideas (A-Level)

Choose your own topic to investigate. The topics below are only meant as
possible suggestions.

-   Determine and demonstrate the critical angle for a plastic object.

-   Propose **and carry out** an experiment on something you are curious
    about (get your lab instructor’s approval first )

## \
Lab 10: LENSES

### Equipment

-   Light boxes with power supply and various optics

-   Optical bench, with assorted mounts and optics (pinhole and lenses)

## Conceptual (C-Level) DONE BEFORE LAB

Explore image formation and refractive lenses.

<http://www.demonstrations.wolfram.com/RayTracingWithLenses/>

<http://www.demonstrations.wolfram.com/RayDiagramsForLenses/>

Complete the ray tracing worksheet. Trace the rays to determine the
image location for an object in the following situations:

-   Converging lens (inside and outside the focal point)

-   Diverging lens (inside and outside the focal point)

How would your ray tracing change if the lens material had a smaller
index of refraction than the medium in which it was placed? (for
instance, an air lens placed in water)

<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">*Explorations (in lab)*</span>:

-   Form an image of an object on a screen with a lens. What happens to
    the image when you cover the top half of the lens?

## Basic Lab (B-Level)

-   Determine the focal length of two different converging lens (and
    compare with stated value)

    -   Set up an object, and determine the position of the image as the
        object distance from the lens is varied.

    -   Graph the image location versus the object location, and compare
        the resulting function to what is expected.

## Advanced/Extended Lab Ideas (A-Level)

-   Use two lenses to construct a telescope. Compare the performance of
    your telescope to what you expect.

-   Explore the physics of the eye, and find a way to test your
    eyesight.

-   Investigate optical illusions and construct one

-   Propose **and carry out** an experiment on something you are curious
    about (get your lab instructor’s approval first )

SEE DELETED RAY TRACING WORKSHEET

###

# Lab 12: LIGHT SPECTRA

### Additional Equipment

-   Photometers, spectrometers, gratings

-   Various light sources

-   Light boxes and color filters

## Conceptual (C-Level)

Given an ideal point source of light that radiates in all directions
determine what shape you expect the irradiance as a function of radial
distance to look like. As a reminder, take a look at the simulation:
http://www.demonstrations.wolfram.com/InverseSquareLaws/

Graph the “ideal” spectrum (intensity as a function of λ and *f* ) for
the following:

-   A blue object

<!-- -->

-   A red object

-   A yellow object

<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">*Explorations*</span>: Put on the
diffraction glasses (also called “fireworks glasses”) and observe
different light sources. What do you notice?

## Basic Lab (B-Level)

-   Measure intensity/irradiance as a function of distance for a light
    source.

    -   Comment on the shape of your graph. What did you expect to see?

-   Using the spectrometer, graph the spectra from three different
    spectral tubes [H, He, Ne, Hg].

    -   Determine the expected spectra and compare with your results.
        Use the diffraction glasses to help you. <span
        style="font-variant:small-caps;">Note</span>: Consider
        referencing other sources for information on spectral lines.

***Danger High Voltage!*** The spectra tubes are powered by a high
voltage source. Make sure the source is unplugged before changing tubes.

***Caution Fragile!*** The spectra tubes are fragile. Please handle the
tubes by their ends. Please avoid getting oil (from your hands) on the
tubes – especially the center thin region.

## Advanced/Extended Lab Ideas (A-Level)

Choose your own topic to investigate. The topics below are only meant as
possible suggestions.

-   Graph the spectra from other light sources.

    -   Incandescent light bulb (try dimming it), candle, fluorescent
        light bulb…

-   Graph absorption and/or transmission spectra for different
    solutions.

    -   Chloroplasts or a concentration of creamer in water.


