College Physics II Laboratory Manual

Physics 161L

Spring 2014

 
=

Lab Structure
=============

Schedule 
---------

Instead of one 3 hour (marathon) lab session, your lab session is
actually split into two smaller time slots. Hence you meet both Tuesday
and Thursday for lab. The split lab time allows you to check your
understanding (i.e. consult an outside resource), ask a question in
lecture and minimizes fatigue (including hunger) that often occurs
during a longer lab. You will have two time slots to finish most lab
activities. You may work in a lab whenever there is not a regularly
scheduled class present.

Lab summaries are due at the start of the next scheduled lab period.

### **Individual Work**

You are expected to keep a lab journal (aka notebook). Lab journals do
not have to be “official” lab books. Spiral bound notebooks or 3-ring
binders can work very well. Whatever method you choose should keep you
organized.

You are responsible for all lab work. It is a good idea to save data and
lab summaries on a personal electronic device (eg. USB drive). LoggerPro
data files can be saved and analyzed at a later time.

### **Equipment**

You will be using the universal lab interface (ULI) LabPro units with
the LoggerPro software (version 3.8 or newer). Every lab station is
equipped with basic equipment

-   Motion Detector

<!-- -->

-   Force Sensors (2x)

-   Carts (2x) and track with associated mounting equipment (stands
    etc.)

-   Optical Apparatus (track mounted and exploration box)

-   DMM, Function Generator, DC power supply and associated electrical
    components

-   Dip needle and Masses

-   Scissors, markers, colored pencils, ruler and protractor

If you do not know how to use a particular piece of equipment consult
the manuals (online), an instructor, or another group.

Clean up after yourself. This is a common courtesy – messy lab groups
will have deductions taken from the whole group.

CBA labs 
---------

There are three components to every lab:

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Level**   **Purpose**                        > **Summary**
                                                 
  ----------- ---------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **C**       Conceptual understanding           > Conceptual Diagrams, Quantitative Relationships with Explanations – with group agreement on all of the above.
                                                 

  **B**       Basic Experimental measurement     > Graph showing quantitative relationship(s) with written explanation.
                                                 

  **A**       (Advanced) Extended lab activity   > Graph showing quantitative relationship(s) with written explanation. Note: Additional information about the relationship being analyzed may be needed.
                                                 
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

You and your lab group are checked and evaluated on your C-level lab
during the first time slot. The C-level check consists of evaluating a
lab journal (taken at random from group members) for correct diagrams
and explanations along with and some additional questions asked of group
members.

Group lab summaries are turned in for the B-level and A-level. Lab
summaries are short – typically one page consisting of a graph with an
explanation. A quality graph has

-   appropriate labels and error bars

-   a best fit curve showing the trend or relationship between
    variables.

A good explanation will include

-   a 1-2 sentence description of what you did to get the plot (what
    experiment)

-   a description of what the plot says/means

-   what you expect the plot to look like, and

-   why you expect the plot to look like it does (or why you expect it
    to look different)

-   key words from the physics concepts being explored used in each of
    the above 3 points

-   a discussion of how you assessed uncertainties in your measurements
    or calculations

A good lab summary does **not** need

-   an introduction describing or discussing the purpose of the activity

-   a section describing your measurement methods, though you may want
    to mention your methods (briefly!) when discussing your
    uncertainties

If summaries are turned in early you may resubmit corrected summaries to
address instructor critiques (please attach the old summary to your new
submission).

You can always work on the B-level lab if it is taking time for an
instructor to check your group for the C-level understanding. You need
to complete all of the B-level activities – and address them in your
group summary. You only have to complete a single A-level activity. The
lab manual has suggestions for A-level activities but you may also
propose and conduct your own investigation. Typically an advanced lab
activity also involves more attention to error analysis.

### **Group Work** 

You will be working in a group (of typically three students) on your
C-level and B-level lab activities. You may choose to work with a
different group or alone when completing the (optional) A-level lab
activity. Your group will change during the semester.

Remember that you can always consult other groups if you are stuck and
need help. Do not wait for an instructor if you need help – go ask a
group that looks like they know what is going on.

Lab Evaluation
--------------

Some notes about how your lab performance is evaluated:

-   There is no credit given for unexcused absences from lab.

-   You are expected to come to lab with a conceptual diagram and ideas
    already written in your lab journal. You will lose a C-level point
    if you are not prepared.

-   The lab score is weighted towards the C-level.

-   **A-level activities often require extra time to complete.**

-   The percent lab score is given by
    [5\*(C)+3\*(B)+2\*(A)+42]/82 \*100%. The following table gives the
    calculated lab percentage given different points earned for the
    C-level, B-level and A-level lab components.

**ABC Lab Rubric**

**C-level**

Written response from individual

(quick check); group oral questioning.

Must work in assigned group.

Must get at least a 3 on the C-level lab to get credit for any B-level
or A-level work.

**B-level**

Group summary of quantitative basic lab.

Must work in assigned group.

Must get at least a 2 on the B-level lab to get credit for any A-level
work.

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  > **1**   > Multiple elements missing                                                  > Did something minimal
                                                                                         
  --------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  > **2**   > Missing physics explanations and uncertainty in measured quantities4       > Correctly labeled plots, reported results (but no interpretation)
                                                                                         

  > **3**   > Most elements present (plot, fit, uncertainties) – at least 75% correct.   > Data and analysis; some physics, but no explicit mention of the model (eqn) used
                                                                                         

  > **4**   > All elements correct – succinct summary                                    Explicitly compares the physics model (eqn) with their measurements
            >                                                                            
            > touching on relevant physics                                               
                                                                                         
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**A-level**

Group summary of advanced lab activity. The exact activity is up to
each group to formulate. The A-level allows for more inquiry-based
investigations. Try to have quantitative results and include error,
unless a theoretical investigation.

May work with anyone. (People do *not* need to work in their assigned
group.)

An A-level activity can be a future B-level lab, or can be based on
B-level results.

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  > **1**   > Activity lacks purpose and focus.
            
  --------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  > **2**   > Missing uncertainty in measured quantities (+/-)
            

  > **3**   > Appropriate graph included (with error bars, labels and line fit).
            

  > **4**   > Project investigates relevant physics. All elements correct with succinct (and
            >
            > correct) interpretation of physics (see above)
            
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SCORE TRACKER (enter scores below throughout the semester)

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  > **LAB**   > **C-level**   > **B-level**   > **A-level**   > **Pts**   > **%**
                                                                          
  ----------- --------------- --------------- --------------- ----------- ---------
  > **L01**                                                               
                                                                          

  > **L02**                                                               
                                                                          

  > **L03**                                                               
                                                                          

  > **L04**                                                               
                                                                          

  > **L05**                                                               
                                                                          

  > **L06**                                                               
                                                                          

  > **L07**                                                               
                                                                          

  > **L08**                                                               
                                                                          

  > **L09**                                                               
                                                                          

  > **L10**                                                               
                                                                          

  > **L11**                                                               
                                                                          

  > **L12**                                                               
                                                                          
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Schedule Spring 2014**

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Week of**    **Monday**      **Tuesday**                       **Wednesday**   **Thursday**                    **Friday**
  -------------- --------------- --------------------------------- --------------- ------------------------------- ---------------
  **Jan 13**     Chapter 20      Pre-Tests                         Chapter 20      Lab 1:\                         Chapter 20
                                                                                   Conductors & Insulators         

  **Jan 20**     **No School**   Lab 1: Continued                  Chapter 20      Lab 2: Electric Force & Field   Chapter 20

  **Jan 27**     Chapter 21      Lab 2: Continued                  Chapter 21      Lab 3: Potentials               Chapter 21

  **Feb 3**      Chapter 21      Lab 3: Continued                  Catch-Up        **Exam 1**                      Chapter 22

  **Feb 10**     Chapter 22      Lab 4:\                           Chapter 22      Lab 4: Continued                Chapter 23
                                 Electrical Energy                                                                 

  **Feb 17**     Chapter 23      Lab 5: Resistors                  Chapter 23      Lab 5: Continued                Chapter 23

  **Feb 26**     Chapter 23      Lab 6:\                           Chapter 24      Lab 6: Continued                Chapter 24
                                 Series & Parallel                                                                 

  **Mar 3**      Chapter 24      Review                            Catch-Up        **Exam 2**                      Chapter 24

  **Mar 10**     Chapter 25      Lab 7: Magnetic Devices           Chapter 25      Lab 7: Continued                Chapter 25

  **Mar 17**     **No School**   **No School**                     **No School**   **No School**                   **No School**

  **Mar 24**     Chapter 25      Lab 8: Induction                  Catch-Up        Lab 8: Continued                Chapter 18

  **Mar 31**     Chapter 18      Lab 9: Snell’s Law                Chapter 18      Lab 9: Continued                Chapter 18

  **April 7**    Chapter 18      Lab 10: Lenses                    Chapter 18      Lab 10: Continued               Chapter 19

  **April 14**   Chapter 19      **Student Academic Conference**   Chapter 19      **Exam 3**                      **No School**

  **April 21**   **No School**   Lab 11: Waves                     Chapter 16      Lab 12: Light Spectra           Chapter 17

  **April 28**   Chapter 17      Lab 12: Continued                 Chapter 17      Post-Tests & Evals              Catch-Up

  **May 5**      Catch-Up        FINAL EXAM:                       **Study Day**                                   
                                                                                                                   
                                 WRITTEN PORTION                                                                   
                                                                                                                   
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Note: The exam/topic dates are subject to change, except for the
Final.**

### \
Lab 1: CONDUCTORS & INSULATORS

### Equipment

-   Electrophorus supplies (tape, Styrofoam/plastic plate and cup, Al
    foil and Al pie plate)

-   Various rods and scraps of fur and assorted fabrics

-   Coffee can “ice pail”

-   Glass beaker or jar

-   Vernier charge sensor

-   Proof plane made of a metal disk (penny), tape, and straw.

### Objective

Physics Concepts

-   Insulators versus conductors

-   Static charges and triboelectric series

-   Charging by induction

Experimental analysis

-   Recognize the uncertainty in measurements

### Conceptual (C-Level) DONE BEFORE LAB

Most people have very little experience with electricity, either static
or flowing. For this reason, an appendix follows the basic lab with a
brief overview of static electricity measurements. Read before coming to
lab and be ready to discuss the following equipment:

-   Faraday ice pail

-   Charge sensor/electroscope

-   Electrophorus

-   Ground plane

-   Proof plane

Predict as much as you can about the following situations:

-   A charged rod is brought up to a metal can and is briefly touched to
    the can. Draw the distribution of charge you would expect to find on
    the exterior of the can if:

    -   The rod is charged and electrically conducting;

    -   The rod is charged and electrically insulating.

A rubber balloon is blown up, rubbed on a small furry animal and stuck
to the ceiling.

-   Draw a diagram showing the charge distribution

-   Draw a force diagram for the balloon

### Basic Lab (B-Level)

-   Many different rod/fabric pairs may be used for rubbing to create
    electricity. Measure the amount and polarity of charge produced by
    as many materials as possible, using the ice pail and charge sensor.
    Relate your findings to the “triboelectric series” (find a chart
    online).

-   Use a proof plane with ice pail/sensor to measure the distribution
    of charge on the electrophorus charge plate. Measure the surface
    charge on the plate both before and after inducing charge by
    touching to ground. Explain the process of charging the
    electrophorus and your findings using words and diagrams. (Think
    “comic strip”)

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  NOTE:

  Charge sensors can measure at max:

  0.5 V scale—5 nC

  2.0 V scale—20 nC

  10.0 V scale—100 nC

  IF YOU HAVE MORE THAN 100 nC and you notice the sensor “maxing”, use a proof plane to transfer smaller amounts to the ice pail, and discharge when the sensor maxes.
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Advanced/Extended Lab Ideas (A-Level) Choose ONE

-   Investigate charge distributions on other charged conductors such as
    spheres or “tear drops”.

-   Does charge that is deposited on a metal shell go to the inside or
    outside wall of the shell?

-   Charge two parallel plates or other conductor configuration and
    determine the resulting electric field lines both theoretically and
    experimentally.

-   Propose **and carry out** an experiment on something you are curious
    about (get your lab instructor’s approval first )

**Appendix 01: Electrostatic Measurements**

**Ice pail:** Your Vernier charge sensor (or electroscope) will allow
you to examine both the polarity and amount of charge that is deposited
on a device known historically as a “Faraday ice pail”. Faraday was a
scientist living in the 19^th^ century who performed most of the
quantitative experiments on electricity and magnetism needed to
understand these fields. Looking around for a common conductive shell,
he happened upon a bucket commonly used to carry ice and chill drinks.
An “ice pail” does not have to be a metal bucket—any thin metallic
uncoated shell will do: such as a coffee or soup can.

After you are done with your measurements on the ice pail, you need a
way to discharge the pail. This is typically done by connecting the ice
pail to “Earth ground” or a “ground plane”. Ground is simply a huge
reservoir that can absorb as much charge as you could possible want to
place there. The surface of the Earth is basically a huge conducting
shell, so ground planes are often wired into the Earth with a copper
wire.

**Electrophorus:** In order to study static charges, you also need a way
to produce them reliably and then transfer them from one object to
another. Most of us are familiar with the idea that static charges will
be produced by rubbing two objects together. However, the objects are
usually insulators and thus cannot be used to move charge from one place
to another (a lesson you will soon see for yourself). The charging
device you will use is the electrophorus.

**Proof plane:** Often you want to do more than just transfer charge
from place to place. You want to sample the charge residing on an object
in a reliable way. The proof plane allows you to do so, being a small,
smooth metal piece on an insulated handle.

Some diagrams illustrating how these devices are typically used follow.

**Ice pail measurements: **

The charge sensor is a voltmeter that measures the potential difference
between two points. The red lead wire is the sensing wire; the black
lead wire is the ground wire. Note that the cable on the sensor has a
metal “shield” going around a central wire. The shield of such a cable
should always be connected to ground—in this case either a large metal
plate or a large piece of Al foil. The ice pail is placed on an
insulating stand (glass) to prevent charge from leaking off the pail
into the surroundings. Humid air will actually carry charge away from
the pail—hopefully slowly enough that you have time to make your
measurements.

To make a measurement, touch the ice pail with a conducting charged
object such as the plate of your electrophorus. When done, briefly
connect the exterior of the ice pail to the ground plane with a wire or
your fingers to discharge.

Another way to make a measurement is to lower a charged object into the
interior of the pail without touching the walls of the pail. What
happens when you remove the charged object, again without touching the
walls?

Note: the charge sensor is very sensitive to charges induced nearby.
Does the charge appear to vary a great deal when you bring your hands or
arms near it? If so, try baring your arm so no fuzzy sweaters are
getting near it. If this does not eliminate the effects, build yourself
a “ground strap” by winding a few sheets of Al foil around your arm,
then connecting the Al foil to the ground plane using a clipped wire.

**Measurements with a proof plane**

A proof plane is simply a small conducting object that can be used to
draw a small amount of charge from a much larger object. You can make a
proof plane from a pencil or dowel (insulating handle) and a penny. To
sample the surface under study, the area of the proof plane must be
tangent to the surface (see above).

**Using an Electrophorus**

The electrophorus charge plate is charged via induction. First, the
insulator plate is rubbed with a fabric that will give the insulator
static charge. The charge plate is placed on top of the insulator, and
will acquire a charge separation but will remain neutral. That is, if
you then remove the charge plate using an insulating handle, the plate
will not be charged. If you touch the top of the charge plate to the
ground plane, whatever charge was at the top of the plate will leak off
to ground, giving the charge plate a net charge. The charge plate may
then be picked up by the insulating handle so the charge can be
transferred. (Note: on a dry day a Styrofoam insulator holds its static
charge for quite some time. Damp humid days require a lot of rubbing to
keep the insulator charged up.)

**Lab 2: ELECTRIC FIELD & FORCE (COULOMB’S LAW)**

### Equipment

-   Various conductors to create different electric field configurations
    – spheres (hollow), parallel plates etc.

-   Electrophorus/Van de Graaff generator

-   Vernier charge sensor and LoggerPro

-   rotary motion sensor

-   Faraday ice pail

### Objective

Physics Concepts

-   Electric field

-   Static charges

-   Charge induction

Experimental analysis

-   Recognize methods to check concepts

-   Recognize the uncertainty in measurements and experimental setups

### Conceptual (C-Level) DONE BEFORE LAB

<http://www.demonstrations.wolfram.com/ElectricFieldGeneratedByTwoPointCharges/>

<http://www.demonstrations.wolfram.com/RepulsionOfChargedPithBalls/>

A small charged sphere is hung from a rod, and brought near a large
stationary charged sphere. The hanging sphere repositions in response to
the stationary charge, so that the string from which it is suspended
makes an angle θ with the vertical.

-   Draw a force diagram for the small hanging sphere.

-   Show (algebraically) that the electric force on the sphere is
    proportional to tan(θ)

-   Think of two separate sets of quantities you could measure to
    determine the electric force on the hanging sphere (HINT: you’ve
    already found one set in the previous bullet point)

### Basic Lab (B-Level)

Set up a lightweight metal sphere on an insulating handle, and attach to
a rotary motion sensor. Place a larger sphere some distance away. Use
the electrophorus to charge both spheres up, then bring the larger
sphere closer to the hanging sphere.

-   Measure the angle the handle makes to the vertical at a close
    distance.

-   Use an ice pail, proof plane and charge sensor to measure the charge
    on both spheres.

-   Calculate the electrical force on the hanging sphere, and compare to
    the expected one from Coulomb’s law.

### Advanced/Extended Lab Ideas (A-Level)

Choose your own topic to investigate. The topics below are only meant as
possible suggestions.

-   Show a mathematical derivation of the dipole pattern, either on-axis
    or perpendicular to the axis.

-   Measure the displacement of the small hanging sphere as a function
    of distance from the large one, and compare the resulting function
    to that expected from Coulomb’s Law.

### Lab 3: POTENTIALS

### Additional Equipment

-   Extra DC voltage source (battery eliminator)

-   Water, tray and various conductors and non-conductors

### Objective

Physics Concepts

-   Potential (voltage)

-   Electric field

Experimental analysis

-   Learn how to configure DMM to measure voltage

-   Learn how to determine the E-field from equipotential lines

### Conceptual (C-Level) DONE BEFORE LAB

Describe how the electric field is related to voltage (electric
potential), both symbolically (mathematically) and semantically (written
description).

Draw the equipotential lines (lines of constant voltage) and electric
field lines for the

-   Parallel plates at two different voltages (top diagram to shown to
    the right)

-   Point charges at two different voltages (bottom diagram shown to the
    right).

Use different colors for the equipotentials and E-field lines.

Using the PhET simulation verify (or modify as necessary) your drawings.
<http://phet.colorado.edu/sims/charges-and-fields/charges-and-fields_en.html>

### Basic Lab (B-Level)

You will experimentally determine the E-field for the above two
configurations by mapping out the equipotential lines.

-   Secure (can you say “duct tape”) the conducting plates before
    putting water in the tray.

-   You need just enough water to cover the bottom of the tray.

-   Ground one conductor and connect the other conductor to +6 volts.

-   Compute the magnitude electric field at the points shown on the
    board.

-   Explain the direction of the electric field either in terms of
    forces or in terms of energy. (“What does a positive charge want to
    do when placed in that field, what about a negative charge?”)

<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">*Explorations*</span>:
Experimentally determine the following:

-   How does the E-field change if you ground one conductor and
    connect +12 volts to the other conductor?

-   How does the E-field change if you use -3 volts and +3 volts?

-   How does the E-field change if you use the same voltage on each
    conductor?

### 

### Advanced/Extended Lab Ideas (A-Level) Choose ONE

Choose your own topic to investigate. The topic below is only meant as
possible suggestions.

-   Determine the E-field inside and outside a conducting and an
    insulating cylinder placed between two parallel plates at different
    voltages. Note: use steel wool to remove rust and dirt from the
    conducting cylinder.

-   Propose **and carry out** an experiment on something you are curious
    about (get your lab instructor’s approval first )

**\
Lab 4: ELECTRICAL ENERGY (CAPACITORS)**

### Equipment

-   DMM

-   1 Farad capacitor, battery eliminator, light bulb and holder,
    Christmas lights, hand generator, alligator clips, knife switch

-   Electrophorus and fabric for charging

-   Ice pail,Vernier charge sensor, proof plane (Aluminum on ping pong
    ball)

-   Parts to make jars: plastic margarine tube, film cans, cotter
    pins/nails, Al foil, tape

-   Optional: Computer with voltage and current probes

### Objective

Physics Concepts

-   Capacitance

Experimental analysis

-   Graph time varying functions

-   Fit curves to data to determine mathematical relationships

-   Recognizing the uncertainty in measurements

### Conceptual (C-Level) DONE BEFORE LAB

Draw a schematic wiring diagram for a circuit containing a DC voltage
source (battery), capacitor and light bulb.

-   Connect the capacitor and light bulb in series.

-   Connect the capacitor and light bulb in parallel.

Will the light bulb light in your circuits? Explain.

<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">*Simulation*</span>:
<http://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulation/circuit-construction-kit-ac>

Make sure to use the “AC/DC Circuit” simulation found at the link above.

-   Connect a light bulb to a battery.

-   Add a capacitor to your circuit. Wire the parts in series – which
    means connect them one after the other to make one big path or
    circuit.

-   Adding a “knife” switch in series is helpful to control when the
    circuit is closed. You can also then open the circuit, remove the
    battery, and see what happens when the switch is closed with the
    capacitor charged up. Note that the simulation shows the flow of
    negative charge (blue).

-   Comment on what you observe in the simulation. Is this what you
    expected?

### Basic Lab (B-Level)

-   Connect the 1-Farad capacitor to the hand generator. Crank a bit,
    stop (remove your hand from the handle) and explain what you
    observe. <span style="font-variant:small-caps;">Note</span>: The
    capacitor is polarized. You must connect the positive terminals and
    negative terminals correctly.

-   Add a light bulb in series with the capacitor and generator and
    observe the circuit behavior.

-   After cranking for a bit, disconnect the generator from the circuit
    and observe.

-   Repeat for the light bulb and capacitor in parallel.

-   Does the order of the light bulb and capacitor matter? Does the
    arrangement matter?

**\
**

**Lab 5: RESISTORS (OHM’S OBSERVATION)**

### Additional Equipment

-   DMM and battery eliminator

-   56Ω resistor, light bulb and holder, appropriate cables

-   Optional: Computer with voltage and current probes, hand generator

### Objective

Physics Concepts

-   Ohm’s Observation

-   Power

Experimental technique

-   Correctly connecting ammeter (and voltmeter) in a circuit

Experimental analysis

-   Fit curves to data to determine mathematical relationships

-   Recognizing the uncertainty in measurements

### Conceptual (C-Level) DONE BEFORE LAB

<http://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulation/circuit-construction-kit-ac>

Draw a schematic wiring diagram for a circuit containing a DC voltage
source (battery) and a resistive load (either a light bulb or resistor).

-   Show how to connect an ammeter to this circuit.

-   Show how to connect a voltmeter to this circuit.

Note: A voltmeter is connected in parallel across the object you wish to
measure the voltage drop. An ideal voltmeter has infinite resistance. An
ammeter is connected in series to measure the current through an object.
An ideal ammeter has zero resistance. A fuse protects an ammeter from
too much current. Your DMM can easily be reconfigured to act as an
ammeter and measure current.

-   What happens if you connect a voltmeter incorrectly in your circuit?

-   What happens if you connect an ammeter incorrectly in your circuit?

<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">*Explorations*</span>:

> Carry out the following explorations with the on-line circuit
> simulation and in the lab.

-   Measure the resistance of the light bulb using the
    “Resistance/Ohm/Ω” setting on the DMM. Calculate the theoretical
    power used by the light bulb when operated at 3V.

-   Determine the resistance of the resistor (using color code and DMM).
    Calculate the power used by the resistor when operated at 3V.

-   Try connecting the voltmeter in series and observe any changes to
    your circuit. Note: ***Do not*** connect the ammeter incorrectly.

### Basic Lab (B-Level)

-   Graph the voltage as a function of current for each device (light
    bulb and resistor). What does your data tell you?

    -   Please try to avoid burning out the light bulb!

-   Explain any discrepancies with theory and note any observations.

### Advanced/Extended Lab Ideas (A-Level)

Choose your own topic to investigate. The topic below is only meant as
possible suggestions.

-   Use a battery and measure the voltage and current as you decrease
    the resistance in a circuit. (You may also be able to do this for
    the battery eliminator)

-   Propose **and carry out** an experiment on something you are curious
    about (get your lab instructor’s approval first )

**\
Lab 6: SERIES & PARALLEL (COMPLEX CIRCUITS)**

### Equipment

-   DMM

-   Assorted resistors, wires, alligator clips

-   Optional: Computer with voltage (and current) probes

### Objective

Physics Concepts

-   Electrical Power

-   ΣI=0 into a node, ΣV=0 around a closed loop

Experimental analysis

-   Recognizing the uncertainty in measurements

### Conceptual (C-Level) DONE BEFORE LAB

Suppose you have four resistors connected in the form of a square, as
shown below. Are these resistors in series? In parallel? Does it matter
which of the two tabs 1-4 you connect to the DMM for measuring
resistance?

Suppose you connect a battery source of voltage V~s~ between the two
tabs in the diagram labeled B and D. Predict the power that would be
drawn from the battery by the circuit, in terms of the circuit
parameters given. HINT: Find the resistance between B and D first!

### Basic Lab (B-Level)

-   Choose 4 different resistor values, and connect in the square
    arrangement shown above. Measure the resistance between all possible
    pairs of tabs A, B, C, D; compare to expected resistance. (Create a
    table with measured and expected values for each)

-   Connect a battery eliminator between tabs B and D (or any pair) in
    the arrangement shown above. Measure the power the circuit draws
    from the battery source, and compare to expected.

### Advanced/Extended Lab Ideas (A-Level) Choose ONE

-   Determine the internal resistance for a battery (note—you can’t just
    use a DMM as a resistance meter for this one).

-   Use a Wheatstone bridge to determine an unknown resistance. (We have
    setups if you want to use one)

-   Explore various arrangements of capacitors and resistors in a
    circuit.

**\
**

### Lab 7: MAGNETIC DEVICES

### Overview

You will be working on a hands-on activity this week.

The objectives are to build:

1.  An electromagnet

2.  A working motor and speaker. Both are practical uses for an
    electromagnet. In fact, if you look around your home you will find
    lots of electromagnets.

### Objective 1:

Magnets:

-   How many different ways can you use a nail to pick up a paperclip?
    (Hooking the paperclip on the tip of the nail does not count)

<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">*Useful Supplies:*</span>

-   (D-cell)

-   Nail

-   Permanent magnet

-   Paperclips

<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">*Useful Equipment:*</span>

-   eliminator

<!-- -->

-   DMM

Directions for Electromagnet:

-   Wind wire around a nail.

-   Connect ends of wire to battery

-   Voila! You have a magnet.

### Experimental Considerations

-   Watch the temperature of circuit components.

-   How can you increase the amount of paperclips your electromagnet can
    pick up?

### Objective 2:

Construct a motor and speaker.

<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">*Useful Supplies:*</span>

-   Cup (16 oz) and duct tape

-   Enameled wire (26-30 AWG)

-   Permanent magnet (face pole)

-   Audio plug (1/8”)

<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">*Useful Equipment:*</span>

-   Function generator and oscilloscope

<!-- -->

-   ULI Microphone

-   eliminator

-   Vernier Hall probe

Directions for motor:

-   Look online for a simple design using the least amount of materials

-   Note that the “simpler” the motor, the harder it usually is to
    > explain why it produces the motion that it does. Attempt to
    > explain how your motor works.

Directions for speaker:

-   Wind a coil of wire and tape onto the bottom of the cup.

-   Remove enamel from ends of coil and connect to audio source.

-   Mount (or hold) permanent magnet near coil.

-   Voila! You have a speaker.

### Experimental Considerations

-   Can you make measurements on your motor to verify that it works the
    way you think it does?

-   Quantify your speaker by using the function generator and
    oscilloscope and/or microphone.

-   What do you think the “volume” buttons do, physically?

**Simple motor Simple speaker**

**\
**

**Lab 8: INDUCTION**

### Equipment

-   DMM, oscilloscope, function generator and step-down transformers.

-   Solenoid, magnets, battery eliminator and connectors (BNC, banana
    and alligator)

-   Inductive brake, inductive wand with gap magnet. motors.

-   Demo apparatus: jumping ring and conductive pipe with rare-earth
    magnet

### Objective

Physics Concepts

-   Magnetic field flux and induced currents

Experimental analysis

-   Graph time varying functions, combine measurements to graph new
    quantities

-   Recognizing the uncertainty in measurements

### Conceptual (C-Level) DONE BEFORE LAB

Describe what Faraday’s Law is using your own words.

Run the simulation “Faraday’s Electromagnetic Lab” , and examine the
following parts: (<http://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulation/faraday>)

-   Under the “Pickup Coil” tab, move the magnet into and out of the
    coil. Start with the magnet on the left, with the N pole closest to
    the coil. Explain the direction of the current as the magnet moves
    towards the loop, and away from the coil.

-   Repeat for the S pole being closest to the coil.

-   Use the voltmeter instead of the light bulb, and describe what
    happens to the voltage driving the current when the magnet is moved
    faster.

### Basic Lab (B-Level)

You will be measuring time-varying voltage signals.

-   Connect a solenoid to a voltage probe. Move a cow magnet into and
    out of the coils of the solenoid as smoothly as possible, while a
    group member times the period of motion (alternately, use a motion
    sensor). Determine the amplitude of the induced signal in the
    solenoid as a function of frequency of magnetic motion. Relate your
    findings to Faraday’s Law of induction.

-   There are three different aluminum wands that may be mounted on a
    rotary motion sensor. Mount each one and let it swing between the
    poles of the mounted magnet pair. Measure the time it takes for each
    of the wands to come to a stand still. Hypothesize why the wands
    slow down differently, based on your understanding of Faraday’s Law
    of Induction.

### Advanced/Extended Lab Ideas (A-Level)

-   Determine the terminal velocity of magnet in free-fall through
    conductive pipe. Compare theory to experiment.

-   Use an oscilloscope to determine the amplitude and frequency for the
    output from the step-down transformer. Compare with DMM voltage
    reading.

-   Connect one of the small hand-cranked “genencon” generators to the
    input of an oscilloscope. Map out the DC level of the output versus
    frequency of cranking, and relate to Faraday’s Law of Induction.
    Although the generator is a DC generator, notice there is a small AC
    component that may be investigated as well.

-   Determine the voltage signal from a Hall Effect probe positioned
    near a working motor. Make sure to include a diagram of your setup
    and expected DC and AC signals. Note: Use the Faraday’s Law
    simulation to determine what to expect when you create a generator.

-   Can you measure a signal in a solenoid surrounding a conductive pipe
    when a magnet is dropped through the pipe?

-   Determine the motor frequency as a function of current through the
    electromagnet in a motor.

-   Examine the signal produced when one of the coil wands swings
    between the poles of the mounted magnet pair. The coil wands may be
    mounted on a rotary motion sensor.

**\
**

-   

### Lab 9: SNELL’S LAW (REFRACTION)

### Additional Equipment

-   Light boxes with power supply and various optics

### Objective

Physics Concepts

-   Refraction (Snell’s Law)

Experimental analysis

-   Fit curves to data to determine mathematical relationships

-   Recognizing the uncertainty in measurements

### Conceptual (C-Level) DONE BEFORE LAB

Light travels in a straight line except when it encounters an interface
(don’t worry about curved space right now). View the following demos:

<http://www.demonstrations.wolfram.com/SnellsLawOfRefractionWaveFronts/>

<http://www.demonstrations.wolfram.com/FermatsPrincipleAndSnellsLaw/>

<http://www.demonstrations.wolfram.com/ReflectionAndRefractionOnAFlatSurfaceBetweenTwoDifferentMate/>

Draw a picture showing the refraction of light for the following
situations. Clearly indicate where the actual object is located and
where the image is located. Indicate apparent depth and actual depth as
well as what assumptions you make.

-   You are looking at a fish under water (n~water~ \> n~air~).

<!-- -->

-   You are looking up at a bird while swimming under water.

<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">*Explorations (IN LAB)*</span>:

-   Using a rectangular object examine a single ray of light as it
    enters and leaves the object. When is the offset greatest?

-   Try other objects (an equilateral triangle is interesting). What do
    you notice?

### Basic Lab (B-Level)

Using Snell’s Law, determine the index of refraction for one of the
plastic objects.

-   Any object is fine to use. You just need to find a procedure to
    > measure the angle of incidence and the angle of refraction.

-   Make an appropriate plot of your angular data and use a linear fit
    > to find the index of refraction.

> <span style="font-variant:small-caps;">Note</span>: The half-moon
> object simplifies the procedure

Beware of stray light rays! The height of the light ray from the light
box (the slit height) is greater than the height of the plastic objects.
You will always see an un-refracted ray illuminate the top of these
objects. If it bothers you use tape to reduce the slit height.

### Advanced/Extended Lab Ideas (A-Level)

Choose your own topic to investigate. The topics below are only meant as
possible suggestions.

-   Determine and demonstrate the critical angle for a plastic object.

-   Propose **and carry out** an experiment on something you are curious
    about (get your lab instructor’s approval first )

### Lab 10: LENSES

### Equipment

-   Light boxes with power supply and various optics

-   Optical bench, with assorted mounts and optics (pinhole and lenses)

### Objective

Physics Concepts

-   Lensmaker’s Formula and Gaussian Lens Equation

-   Ray tracing

Experimental analysis

-   Fit curves to data to determine mathematical relationships

-   Recognizing the uncertainty in measurements

### Conceptual (C-Level) DONE BEFORE LAB

Explore image formation and refractive lenses.

<http://www.demonstrations.wolfram.com/RayTracingWithLenses/>

<http://www.demonstrations.wolfram.com/RayDiagramsForLenses/>

Complete the ray tracing worksheet. Trace the rays to determine the
image location for an object in the following situations:

-   Converging lens (inside and outside the focal point)

-   Diverging lens (inside and outside the focal point)

How would your ray tracing change if the lens material had a smaller
index of refraction than the medium in which it was placed? (for
instance, an air lens placed in water)

<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">*Explorations (in lab)*</span>:

-   Form an image of an object on a screen with a lens. What happens to
    the image when you cover the top half of the lens?

### Basic Lab (B-Level)

-   Determine the focal length of two different converging lens (and
    compare with stated value)

    -   Set up an object, and determine the position of the image as the
        object distance from the lens is varied.

    -   Graph the image location versus the object location, and compare
        the resulting function to what is expected.

### Advanced/Extended Lab Ideas (A-Level)

-   Use two lenses to construct a telescope. Compare the performance of
    your telescope to what you expect.

-   Explore the physics of the eye, and find a way to test your
    eyesight.

-   Investigate optical illusions and construct one

-   Propose **and carry out** an experiment on something you are curious
    about (get your lab instructor’s approval first )

### Ray Tracing - Lenses

Diverging Lens (focal lengths less than zero)

1.  Draw a ray from (top of) object through center of lens. This ray is
    > not bent.

2.  Draw a ray from (top of) object parallel to axis. When the ray
    > reaches the lens plane it bends (away from optical axis) so that
    > the ray looks like it originates from the focal point (A).

3.  Draw axial ray through lens. (The dotted line already shown)

4.  Draw a ray from (top of) object towards the (secondary) focal point
    > (B). When the ray reaches the lens plane it will bend (away from
    > the optical axis) so that the ray becomes parallel to the axis.

Converging Lens (focal lengths greater than zero)

1.  Draw a ray from (top of) object through center of lens.

2.  Draw a ray from (top of) object parallel to axis. When the ray
    reaches the lens plane it bends so that the ray passes through the
    focal point (A).

3.  Draw axial ray through lens. (The dotted line already shown)

4.  Draw a ray from (top of) object that either passes through or looks
    like it comes from the (secondary) focal point (B). When the ray
    reaches the lens plane it will bend (towards the optical axis) so
    that the ray becomes parallel to the axis.

### \
Lab 11: WAVES

  Waves
  ------------------- --
  Velocity
  Wave Equation
  Wave number
  Angular frequency

### 

### Additional Equipment

-   Microphone, Various tuning forks

-   String and Speaker to drive string wave

### Objective

Data collection

-   Quantitative analysis of sound wave

Data analysis

-   Measure frequency

Physics Concepts

-   Wave equation

-   Fourier Transform gives frequency spectrum of time data

-   Connection between Reciprocal-Space and Real-Space

### Conceptual (C-Level) DONE BEFORE LAB

Sketch a picture of a sinusoidal wave and identify the wavelength,
period and amplitude.

-   Are the wavelength and period of a wave related? How?

The most general form for a wave is the wave equation (see above).

-   Write the wave equation for a wave with 2 cm amplitude, 2 second
    period, 3 cm wavelength and a phase shift of 0.

-   How do your plots change if the phase shift is π/2? Sketch them
    again.

Go to the online wave simulation:
http://www.demonstrations.wolfram.com/SumOfSines/

Play with the simulation to investigate wave superposition. Then answer
the following questions.

-   How does changing the following change the wave?

    -   A

    -   φ

-   What do you need to do to:

    -   Double the amplitude?

    -   Halve the amplitude?

    -   Make the amplitude zero?

### Basic Lab (B-level)

-   Determine the frequency of sound from a tuning fork:

    -   Measure the period of oscillation from a sinusoidal curve-fit to
        the recorded wave.

    -   Examine the frequency spectrum (take the Fourier Transform of
        your data).

<!-- -->

-   Using the string wave apparatus plot the frequency and wavelength of
    the first 5 harmonics. Determine the wave speed and match to theory.
    <span style="font-variant:small-caps;">Note</span>: Use non-stretchy
    string so the mass density (mass per length) is approximately
    constant.

### Advanced/Extended Lab Ideas (A-level) 

Choose your own topic to investigate. The topics below are only meant as
possible suggestions.

-   Examine the frequency spectrum of a solid rod. Where you hold the
    rod affects the spectrum.

-   Using a function generator compare the higher order harmonics
    present in sinusoidal, triangle and square waves. You will probably
    need a speaker to connect to the function generator.

-   Demonstrate constructive and destructive interference.

-   Determine the sound intensity as a function of distance.

-   Propose **and carry out** an experiment on something you are curious
    about (get your lab instructor’s approval first )

### Lab 12: LIGHT SPECTRA

### Additional Equipment

-   Photometers, spectrometers, gratings

-   Various light sources

-   Light boxes and color filters

### Objective

Physics Concepts

-   Irradiance

-   Spectroscopy

Experimental analysis

-   Fit curves to data to determine mathematical relationships

-   Recognizing the uncertainty in measurements

### Conceptual (C-Level)

Given an ideal point source of light that radiates in all directions
determine what shape you expect the irradiance as a function of radial
distance to look like. As a reminder, take a look at the simulation:
http://www.demonstrations.wolfram.com/InverseSquareLaws/

Graph the “ideal” spectrum (intensity as a function of λ and *f* ) for
the following:

-   A blue object

<!-- -->

-   A red object

-   A yellow object

<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">*Explorations*</span>: Put on the
diffraction glasses (also called “fireworks glasses”) and observe
different light sources. What do you notice?

### Basic Lab (B-Level)

-   Measure intensity/irradiance as a function of distance for a light
    source.

    -   Comment on the shape of your graph. What did you expect to see?

-   Using the spectrometer, graph the spectra from three different
    spectral tubes [H, He, Ne, Hg].

    -   Determine the expected spectra and compare with your results.
        Use the diffraction glasses to help you. <span
        style="font-variant:small-caps;">Note</span>: Consider
        referencing other sources for information on spectral lines.

***Danger High Voltage!*** The spectra tubes are powered by a high
voltage source. Make sure the source is unplugged before changing tubes.

***Caution Fragile!*** The spectra tubes are fragile. Please handle the
tubes by their ends. Please avoid getting oil (from your hands) on the
tubes – especially the center thin region.

### Advanced/Extended Lab Ideas (A-Level)

Choose your own topic to investigate. The topics below are only meant as
possible suggestions.

-   Graph the spectra from other light sources.

    -   Incandescent light bulb (try dimming it), candle, fluorescent
        light bulb…

-   Graph absorption and/or transmission spectra for different
    solutions.

    -   Chloroplasts or a concentration of creamer in water.


